We have seen how to use Breadth First and
Depth First search to explore whether there
is a path from a source to a target vertex.
But one can do a lot more with these two procedures.
So, recall that a graph is a set of vertices
and a set of edges which are connections between
the vertices, and these maybe directed or
undirected.
Now, when we do breadth first search, we do
a level by level explorations starting at
one vertex, when we do depth first search
each time we go to a new vertex, we switch
the exploration to that vertex and whenever
we reach a dead end we backup.
And one of the features of depth first search
is that we can keep track of the order in
which we enter and exit vertices in this recursive
procedure.
So, now let us see how we can use BFS and
DFS to find out more about the structure of
the underlying graph.
So, one fundamental property of an undirected
graph is whether or not it is connected, can
we go from every vertex to every other vertex.
So, you can see in these two pictures that
the graph on the left is connected, because
you can go from every vertex to every other
vertex.
On the other hand, on the right hand side
some vertices cannot be reached from other
vertices.
For example, one cannot go from 2 to 7 or
from 6 to anywhere else.
Now, when we have an undirected graph which
is disconnected, we are also interested in
finding out what the connected components
are....
So, we want to group together those vertices
which are connected to each other into one
unit and find out which of these units are
there and how many such units are there, and
which vertices belong to the same unit.
So, our first target is to used BFS or DFS
to identify connected components.
So, this is quite easy to do we start with
the node label 1 or any other node.
Now, we run BFS or DFS from this node and
in this process we will mark a number of nodes
as visited, at this point if there are any
vertices which are not visited by BFS or DFS
starting from the first node, this means that
they do not belong to the same connected component.
So, it is easy to show that what is marked
visited is equal to the connected component.
So, the connected component containing the
start node, so now we go back and we look
at the first node in the list which is not
mark visited and we restart BFS or DFS from
that node.
So, we will get a new connected component,
consisting of those vertices which are reachable
from the first node which was marked unconnected.
Now, if there are still nodes which are unvisited,
we restart from one of those and go on.
So, what we can do now is, we can label each
DFS with a different number, so at the end
we can associate with each vertex, the number
of the component in which it was discovered.
So, let us look at an example of this, so
supposing we have this graph, we begin by
having an extra variable in our BFS for example,
or even DFS call comp to number the components.
So, we initially said comp 1 and maybe we
start our DFS or BFS from node 1.
So, in this process we will visit 1, 2, 5,
9 and 10 and for all of these we will set
component of j equal to comp.
Now, at this point we will realize that not
all nodes have been visited only 5 out of
the 12 nodes have been visited.
So, we go to the smallest node which is not
visited namely 3 and restart, but before we
restart we update comp to 2.
Now, we start a BFS or a DFS at node 3 and
visit everything that we can reach, and in
this process we will identify these 6 nodes
as being in component 2, at this point node
6 is still not marked visited.
So, we restart a 3rd round of BFS or DFS with
comp set to 3 and identify a 3rd component.
Now, there are no more unvisited nodes, so
we can stop and in the... as a result of this
repeated application of BFS and DFS, we have
identified all the components and also clustered
them so that all nodes in the same component
are associated with the same component number.
Another interesting structural property of
a graph is whether or not it has cycles.
So, a acyclic graph is a graph such as the
left, in which you cannot start at any node
and follow a sequence of edges and come back
to the node.
On the right we see a graph with cycles.
So, for instance 5, 9 and 10 forms a cycle,
there are also other cycles, there are several
cycles for example, 3, 4, 7, 8 as a whole
form a cycle but there are also smaller cycles
within it like 3, 4, 8 and 3, 7, 8 and 7,
8, 11 is also a cycle and so on.
So, one of the things we can do when we execute
BFS is to keep track of those edges which
are actually used to mark vertices as visited.
Now, if you are a acyclic graph such as one
on the left, you can check that every edge
that is in the graph will actually be used
as part of the BFS search.
On the other hand, if you run BFS on a graph
which has cycles then you will find that some
edges are not used, because when you try to
explore those edges, you find that target
vertex is already visited.
For instance, since 10 is already visited
as a neighbor of 5 when we start exploring
9 we do not use the edge 9, 10.
Likewise, we do not use the edge 4, 8, because
it is already visited as a set of neighbors
of 3, remember in breadth first search we
will go to 3 and explore all its 1 step neighbors.
So, we will mark directly 4, 8 and 7 as visited,
so when we come to 4 we do not need to use
the edge 4, 8 when we come to 7 we do not
need to use 7, 8 and so on.
So, there are these edges which are left out.
Now, it is easy to see that if we have a graph
with n vertices and it is connected and it
does not have cycles, then it will have exactly
n minus 1 edges, this kind of a graph is called
a tree.
So, there are many definitions of trees, but
a tree is basically a connected acyclic graph,
connected means you can go from everywhere
to everywhere, acyclic means there are no
loops and any connected acyclic graph on n
vertices will have exactly n minus 1 edges.
So, in any graph if we explore BFS, the edges
that BFS actually uses will form a tree and
this is called a BFS tree.
Now, what happens about the remaining edges,
well these are called non tree edges, what
you can check very easily is that any non
tree edge will combine with the tree edges
already there to form a cycle.
In other words, when we run BFS if we find
that there are some vertices or some edges
rather which are not used, in other words
there are any non tree edges then this graph
will definitely have a cycle.
So, having a cycle is to equivalent to finding
a non tree edge while doing BFS, what is a
non tree edge it is just an edge when we come
to explore i comma j and find the j has already
been marked visited.
So, we do not go to i, I do not use i comma
j in BFS.
So, let us do the same thing, with DFS and
let us compute the pre and post numbers.
So, that we get some practice at this, so
we start our DFS at vertex 1 and we mark its
counter as 0.
So, we enter vertex 0, vertex 1 at step 0,
so this is the pre number of vertex 0.
The first neighbor we explore from 1 is 2,
so it has pre number 1, but 2 has no further
successors.
So, we exit from 2, so it has post number
2, so remember every time we enter we increment
the counter, every time we exit we increment
the counter.
So, we enter and exit vertex 2 in one step
come back to 1 and explore its next neighbor
which is 5 which we enter at time 3, then
we move vertex 9 at time 4 then from 9 we
go to 10 at time 5, now 10 has no further
neighbors to explore.
So, we exit 10 at time 6, 9 has no further
neighbors, so exit 9 at time 7 come back to
5, then 5 has no further neighbors, so we
exit 5, and then finally we exit 1.
So, at step 9 we have completed processing
1.
Now, we move to the first vertex which is
not marked namely 3, we restart a new DFS
from there.
So, we enter 3 at time 10 from 3 we move to
4 at time 11, from 4 we move to 8 at time
12, from 8 we move to its smallest neighbors
unvisited which is 7 at time 13 from 7 we
go to 11 at time 14, now 11 has no new neighbors
to explore both 7 and 8 have been seen.
So, we exit from 11, 7 has no more neighbors
explore, so we exit from 7, we exit from 8,
no we do not exit from 8, from 8 we still
have to explore 12.
So, we enter 12 at step 17, then we exit from
12 and now 8 is finished, so we exit from
8.
Now, we come back to 4, 4 obviously, has no
other vertices, so we come back to 3 and finally,
we exit from 3 at time 21 at this point 6
is still not marked.
So, we start a new DFS from 6, so we enter
6 at time 22 but 6 has no new neighbors, so
we exit from 6 at time 23.
So, this like BFS generates a collection of
trees.
So, when we do DFS on a disconnected graph,
each connected component will generated tree.
Now, if we look at the edges which we did
not explore, these will again be the edges
which are outside the tree.
So, we can draw them in a different color,
so we have the edge between 5 and 10 which
we did not explore, because we explored 10
directly from 9 and so on.
So, once again just like in BFS, once we have
finished DFS if there are non tree edges,
then we have a cycle.
So, both BFS and DFS on an undirected graph
can reveal a cycle through the presence of
a non tree edge.
So, the situation with directed graphs is
a little more complicated, so let us see what
happens when we have cycles in directed graphs.
So, in a directed graph we need to follow
the edge arrows, arrows along the edges.
So, for example, 1, 3, 4, 1 is cycle, because
we can go around without changing direction,
whereas 1, 6, 2, 1 is not a cycle, because
on the way back I have to switch directions
from 2 to 1 which I cannot do.
So, let us do a DFS and see what this can
tells us about cycles in this graph.
So, we begin with vertex 1 as usual, so 1
has pre number 0 its smallest neighbor is
2 and the smallest neighbor of 2 is 5, and
the smallest neighbor of 5 is 6, and the smallest
neighbor of 6 is 7, now from 7 that are no
outgoing edges.
So, we back track to 6 from 6 the only node
that we can go to is 2 which have seen before,
so we leave at 6.
Now, we come to 5, 5 still has an outgoing
edge which is 8, so we come to 8.
Now, from 8 we cannot do anything, so we return
from 8 back to 5, now 5 has nothing left to
explore.
So, we leave 5 likewise we leave 2 finally,
we come back to 1, now at 1 we have explored
this left path.
So, now we can... we do not look there we
look at other direction we go to 3.
So, we explore 3, 3 will explore 4, but 4
cannot go to 8 or 1, because 1 has already
been seen and so is 8, so 4 will exit, so
3 will exit and then 1 will exit.
So, this happens to be a single connected
graph, but it has cycles, so now if we first
look at these edges, the edges that we have
drawn are tree edges as before.
Now, if you look at the edges that have not
been part of the tree, they fall into 3 groups.
So, the first type of edge which is not a
part of the tree is what we call a forward
edge, so a forward edge is an edge which goes
form a node to a node below it in the tree.
So, we have a node from 1 to 6 for example,.
So, this edge is a tree edge is not a tree
edge, but it is a forward edge because 1 was
above 6 in the tree.
Likewise the node from 5 to 7, because we
actually explore this graph as 5, 6, 7, so
5 to 7 is not tree edge.
So, these are forward edges, the other category
of edges which are there in the graph which
are not in the tree are backward edges, they
go up the tree.
So, from 6 there is this edge back to 2 which
we did not use, because 2 had already been
explored.
Likewise from 4 back to 1 there is this edge
we did not explore, because that was already
there.
There is another category of edges which are
not there in the tree, but which are there
in the graph and these are edges such as from
6 back to 2.
So, this is an edge from a later vertex to
an earlier vertex or from 4 back to 1, so
these are what are called back edges.
So, back edge is an edge in the graph which
in the DFS tree goes from a lower vertex to
a higher vertex.
And finally, there are some edges which are
neither going forward nor backward, but sideways.
So, these are edges like 8 to 7 and from 4
to 8, so these cross, so 4 is not below 8
nor is 8 below 4, 7 is not below 8 because
they are both below 5 and so on.
So, these we call cross edges, now it is easy
to argue that a cross edge will only go from
right to left.
In other words, it can only go from higher
number to lower number, because if you wanted
to draw an edge like this for instance, then
this would mean that there was an edge from
2 to 4.
So, we would explore 4 through 2 rather than
wait and go back 1 and explore.
So, we cannot have cross edges which go from
lower numbers to higher numbers, it must go
from higher numbers to lower numbers.
So, now we have not one, but 3 types of non
tree edges, unlike the directed case when
we had the clear distinction between tree
edges and non tree edges, here we have 3 types
of non tree edges.
Now, which ones of these correspond to cycles,
so if I look at this 1, 3 edge, so this 1
6 edge.
So, this 1 6 edge does not actually create
a cycle, because we already saw that this
is not a cycle.
So, in order for it to complete a cycle, it
must be the case that there is a path including
the edge which forms a directed cycle.
Now, it is easy to see that the only situation
where this will actually happen is if there
is a back edge, because when there is a back
edge we know that there is a path coming from
2 down to 6 and then by following the back
edge this forms a directed cycle.
Likewise, we know that there is a path coming
from 1 down to 4 by following this back edge
we form a directed cycle.
On the other hand, if we look at the other
types of edges for instance, then we have
this path here for this is parallel to the
other path here.
So, together these are both two different
ways of going from 1 to 6, but they are not
a cycle, in same way we can see that if we
have a cross edge like this, then we have
some path coming from here and some path going
from there.
But, again they are just two different ways
of reaching 7 from 5 and they are not really
a cycle.
So, in terms of... by a little analysis that
only back edges form cycles and this is actually
something that you can prove we will not prove
it formally, but it is argued the way we did
just now.
But, a directed graph has a cycle if and only
if DFS will reveals a back edge, now it turns
out that these pre and post numberings are
very useful to help as classify the types
of edges that are there in the graph.
So, for both tree and forward edges, so you
will notice that if you go back to this numbering
that these things form an interval that you
can think of this as from 0 to 15, from step
0 to 15 I was exploring 1, from step 11 to
14 I was exploring 3 from step 2 to 9, I was
exploring 5 and so on.
So, if you look at the pre and the post number
it says I started exploring the number at
the pre and I finished exploring at post and
everything else that was below happened in
between.
So, for a forward edge the internal above
will be bigger than the interval below.
Because, I went below during this period I
came back before it ended.
So, for instance the forward edge from 0,
15 to 3 comma 6.
So, the interval 3, 6 is inside 0, 15 this
is also true for tree edges, because in a
tree edge also if I am going the forwards
I enter then lower node after I enter this.
So, its starting point will be later and its
ending point will be earlier.
So, for both tree edges and forward edges,
if I am going from u to v then the interval
with the start node u will contain the other
one.
So, this will be sitting inside this one,
pre v post v will be sitting inside pre u
post u, so I will have this picture.
So, this is the internal for u and this is
the interval for v. Conversely it is exactly
the opposite for backward edges I start from
a smaller interval and I go to a bigger interval.
So, the smaller integral will be the starting
point of the edge, then the bigger integral
will be the ending point.
So, if I look at an edge in my DFS tree and
if I look at the pre and post numbers associated
with the end points I can determine whether
it is forward edge or backward edge and finally,
it will turn out that for cross edges the
intervals are disjoint.
So, we can see here that we have finished
processing 4... vertex 7 before we get to
8.
So, there is no intersection between the interval
7, 8 and 4, 5 likewise we have finished processing
8 before we went to 4 that is why it is a
cross edge, they are on different branches
of the tree.
So, there is no intersection 7, 8 and 12,
13, so therefore a directed graph has a cycle
if only if DFS reveals a back edge, and we
can classify edges as being forward edges,
backward edges or cross edges by just looking
at the pre and post numbering of the end points
of the edge.
Now, it is important to identify cycles, because
if we do not have cycles we have a very nice
class of graphs called directed acyclic graphs.
These are useful for modeling dependencies.
For instance if you want to list out a bunch
of courses which are being offered and they
have prerequisites, then a natural way to
model this is using a directed graph where
the edges represent prerequisites, for instance
if they have an edge from algebra to calculus
it indicates algebra is a prerequisite for
calculus, it will not have cycles.
Because we cannot have two courses which are
prerequisites for each other; otherwise, we
will not be able to take either course.
So, we will look at directed acyclic graphs
or DAGs soon in a later lecture.
What about connectivity in directed graphs?
So connectivity in a directed graph is not
just a question of having these edges between
the graphs, but having them in the right direction.
So, we say that two nodes are strongly connected,
if I can go from i to j by a path and I can
come back from j to i by a path.
So, it is not enough to just have edges in
some haphazard direction I must be able to
go from i to j and come back from j to i in
which case I say that it is strongly connected.
So, it turns out that a directed graph can
always be decomposed into what are called
strongly connected components.
A strongly connected component has a property
that every pair of nodes in that component
is strongly connected from every node in the
component you can go to every other node in
the component and come back.
So, for instance if will look at this graph
then strongly connected components, one is
the cycle 1, 3, 4 we can go from 1, 2, 3 to
4 and come back.
So, from any node in this cycle we can come
back to any other node.
Likewise 2, 5 and 6 forms are strongly connected
component, 7 on its own is a strongly connected
component.
Because, we cannot go anywhere and 8 also
is a strongly connected component, because
if we leave 8 we cannot come back to 8 the
way this graphic is structured.
So, this graph has 4 strongly connected components,
now it turns out that DFS numbering using
pre and post numbers can be used compute strongly
connect components a very elegant algorithm
is given in the book by Dasgupta Papadimitriou
and Vazirani and if you are interested you
can look it up in that book.
So, we have seen some concrete examples of
what you can compute, there are many other
properties that you can compute using BFS
and DFS.
For instance, there are these things called
articulation points, if you your graph looks
like this where I have some vertex which is
a crucial vertex, if I remove this vertex
this graph falls apart into disconnect components,
I can identify such vertices using BFS and
DFS in particular using DFS.
Similarly, if I have a situation where I have
an edge like this, where if I remove this
edge then the graph gets disconnected, then
I can again identify such an edge using DFS.
Now, these are important, because if these
represents some kind of communication network
or some road network, in these are bottle
necks, these are critical points, if this
is an intersection and there is an accident
no traffic and go from any part on the left
to any part on the right or if this is a network
if this cable gets cut then the network will
get cut disconnected into components.
So, these kinds of properties can also be
computed during BFS and DFS.
So, it is important to realize therefore,
that BFS and DFS is not just for connectivity,
to finding out whether vertex s can reach
vertex t, you can get a wealth of information
and these are linear time algorithms and these
are all operations which can be performed
during BFS and DFS.
So, very efficiently you can compute various
properties of the graph and use these to exploit
these to design more efficient procedures
or to identify other things that need to be
done.